---
title: "Logit models don't make mistakes, people do"
date: 2024-08-02
permalink: /posts/2024/08/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - Methodology
  - Binary outcome
  - Odds ratio
  - Logit model
comments: true
---
(work in progress)

I recently found myself reading the large methodological literature on logit models in sociology again. And I think I found a way to explain some phenomena of logit models that's easier to understand (at least to myself) than the explanations in the prior literature. I'll try it here in a blog before (maybe, one day) attempting to systematically write up a paper. 

<h1> The functional form assumption of logit models </h1>
I feel it's worth it to write out the basic assumption for logit models first. For a logit model to estimate something interpretable, a functional form assumption on the conditional probability $Pro(Y=1 \mid X)$ is needed:
\begin{equation}
 Pr(Y=1 \mid X)=\frac{\exp(\alpha+\beta X)}{1+\exp(\alpha+\beta X)}.
\end{equation}

I'll call this the logit functional form. Given this assumption, using a logit model to regress $Y$ on $X$ will give you consistent estimates of $\alpha$ and $\beta$. 
  
<h1> Why do nested logits not make sense </h1>
Short answer: because you (the researcher) are making self-contradictory assumptions! In two nested logit models, the researcher first use logit to regress $Y$ on $X1$, then again use logit to regress $Y$ on $X1$ and $X2$ at the same time. But to do this, the researcher has to assume that $Pr(Y=1 \mid X1)=\frac{\exp(\alpha+\beta X1)}{1+\exp(\alpha+\beta X1)}$ and $Pr(Y=1 \mid X1, X2)=\frac{\exp(\alpha+\beta 1 X1 + \beta 2 X2)}{1+\exp(\alpha+\beta 1 X1 + \beta 2 X2)}$. But this is generally impossible, because $Pr(Y=1 \mid X1)=E[Pr(Y=1 \mid X1, X2) \mid X1]$, which means that if $Pr(Y=1 \mid X1, X2)$ has a logit functional form, it is generally impossible that $Pr(Y=1 \mid X1)$ also has a logit functional form. (This can be numerically verified by using a simple DGP as an example.) 
Hence, here, the mistake is the researcher's, as the researcher contradict themselves. Logit, on the other hand, makes no mistake. 

<h1> Are logits biased if there's any unmodelled variation in $Y$? </h1>
Short answer: no! Recent methodological literature tends to give readers (or at least me) the impression that omitting covariates that are independent of the predictor variable of interest will bias the estimated logit coefficient. But this impression is false. The reasoning in the literature on this amounts to, again, assuming logit functional forms for both $Pr(Y=1 \mid X1)$ and $Pr(Y=1 \mid X1, X2)$. And of course logit coefficients appear to be "biased" when contradictory assumptions are made by the researcher. If, instead, we just assume $Pr(Y=1 \mid X1)$ alone has a logit functional form, then the logit model will simply give us consistent estimates of the coefficients, regardless of whether there's any unmodelled variation in $Y$. If, for example, $X$ is binary, which means the model is saturated and $Pr(Y=1 \mid X1)$ neccessarily has a logit functional form, then the logit estimates are guaranteed to be consistent, even if at both level of $X$, there are a lot of variations in $Y$.

<h1> What should we do, then? </h1>
Short answer: forget about both logit, and also forget about linear probability model, for that matter.  

